---
title: "Split Primes Recognize Galois"
date: 2025-11-16
author_profile: false
permalink: /posts/2025/11/ring-class-field-galois/
tags:
  - number theory
---

We give a non-standard proof of the fact that the Hilbert class field of a Galois number field is Galois over \\(\mathbb Q\\).

We are after the following theorem.

> **Notation 1.**
Fix an extension \\(L/K\\) of number fields. Then we let \\(\operatorname{Spl}(L/K)\\) denote the collection of prime ideals of \\(\mathcal O_K\\) which are totally split in \\(L\\).

> **Theorem 2.**
Fix a Galois extension \\(L/K\\) of number fields, and assume that \\(K\\) is Galois over \\(\mathbb Q\\). If the set \\(\operatorname{Spl}(L/K)\\) is invariant under \\(\operatorname{Gal}(K/\mathbb Q)\\) (possibly away from a finite set), then \\(L\\) is Galois over \\(\mathbb Q\\).

> **Corollary 3.**
Fix a Galois extension \\(K\\) of \\(\mathbb Q\\). Then the Hilbert class field \\(H\\) of \\(K\\) is Galois over \\(\mathbb Q\\).

*Proof.*
A prime \\(\mathfrak p\\) of \\(K\\) splits completely in \\(H\\) if and only if it is principal. However, being principal in \\(K\\) is a property invariant under \\(\operatorname{Gal}(K/\mathbb Q)\\), so the corollary follows from the theorem. \\(\blacksquare\\)

We now turn to the proof of Theorem 2. Our main input will be the following recognition result.

> **Proposition 4.**
Fix Galois extensions \\(L\\) and \\(L'\\) of a number field \\(K\\). Then \\(L\subseteq L'\\) if and only if \\(\operatorname{Spl}(L'/K)\subseteq\operatorname{Spl}(L/K)\\) (possibly away from a finite set).

The inclusion in the proposition takes place in a fixed algebraic closure of \\(\mathbb Q\\).

*Proof.*
We show the directions separately.
- Observe that an unramified prime \\(\mathfrak p\\) of \\(K\\) splits completely in \\(L\\) if and only if the conjugacy class \\(\mathrm{Frob}\_{\mathfrak p}\|\_L\\) is the identity. Thus, \\(L\subseteq L'\\) implies \\(\operatorname{Spl}(L'/K)\subseteq\operatorname{Spl}(L/K)\\).
- For the converse, we use the Chebotarev density theorem. Consider the composite \\(LL'\\), which is Galois over \\(K\\); we would like to show that \\(LL'=L'\\), for which it is enough to show that \\([LL':K]=[L':K]\\). Well,
\\[\operatorname{Spl}(LL'/K)=\operatorname{Spl}(L/K)\cap\operatorname{Spl}(L'/K)\\]
is just \\(\operatorname{Spl}(L'/K)\\) by hypothesis. On the other hand, the Chebotarev density theorem (and the observation of the previous point) tells us that the density of totally split primes in \\(LL'\\) and \\(L'\\) are \\(1/[LL':K]\\) and \\(1/[L':K]\\), respectively. These densities must be equal, so the equality of degrees follows. \\(\blacksquare\\)

> **Remark 5.**
We do not need the full power of the Chebotarev density theorem to show that the density of split primes in an extension \\(L/K\\) is \\(1/[L:K]\\). In short, the set of primes \\(\mathfrak q\\) in \\(L\\) which lie over a totally split prime of \\(K\\) has Dirichlet density \\(1\\) for norm reasons: not splitting completely increases inertial degree, which causes the norm to explode (namely, note \\(\sum_p1/p^2<\infty\\)). But then the Dirichlet density of totally split primes in \\(K\\) is
\\[\lim_{s\to1^+}\frac{\sum_{\mathfrak p\in\operatorname{Spl}(L/K)}\operatorname N(\mathfrak p)^{-s}}{\sum_{\mathfrak p}\operatorname N(\mathfrak p)^{-s}}=\lim_{s\to1^+}\frac{\frac1{[L:K]}(-\log(s-1))}{(-\log(s-1))},\\]
which is \\(\frac1{[L:K]}\\).

Observe that the proof of Proposition 4 more or less upgrades the following special case.

> **Corollary 6.**
Fix Galois extensions \\(L\\) and \\(L'\\) of a number field \\(K\\). Then \\(L=L'\\) if and only if \\(\operatorname{Spl}(L'/K)=\operatorname{Spl}(L/K)\\) (possibly away from a finite set).

*Proof.*
This is the equality case of Proposition 4. \\(\blacksquare\\)

*Proof of Theorem 2.*
Embed all fields into \\(\overline{\mathbb Q}\\). We would like to show that \\(\sigma(L)=L\\) for any automorphism \\(\sigma\\) of \\(\overline{\mathbb Q}\\). By Corollary 6, it is enough to check that
\\[\operatorname{Spl}(L/K)\stackrel?=\operatorname{Spl}(\sigma(L)/K),\\]
possibly away from a finite set. (Note \\(\sigma(K)=K\\) because \\(K\\) is Galois over \\(\mathbb Q\\).) Well, a prime \\(\mathfrak p\\) of \\(K\\) splits completely in \\(\sigma(L)\\) if and only if \\(\mathrm{Frob}\_{\mathfrak p}\|\_{\sigma(L)}\\) is trivial. However, hitting everything in sight with \\(\sigma^{-1}\\), it is equivalent to show that
\\[\sigma^{-1}\mathrm{Frob}\_{\mathfrak p}\sigma\|\_L\\]
is trivial, which is equivalent to \\(\mathrm{Frob}\_{\sigma^{-1}\mathfrak p}\|\_L\\) being trivial. This last condition is equivalent to \\(\sigma^{-1}\mathfrak p\in\operatorname{Spl}(L/K)\\), which is equivalent to \\(\mathfrak p\in\operatorname{Spl}(L/K)\\) (possibly away from a finite set) by the Galois-invariance hypothesis. This completes the proof. \\(\blacksquare\\)

Now that we are done proving our theorem, let's give another application.

> **Example 7.**
Let \\(K\\) be an imaginary quadratic field, and choose \\(\alpha\\) so that \\(\mathcal O_K=\mathbb Z+\mathbb Z\alpha\\). For each positive integer \\(n\\), we define the order \\(\mathcal O_n=\mathbb Z+\mathbb Zn\alpha\\), and we define the ring class field \\(H_n\\) to correspond to the adelic quotient
\\[K^\times\backslash\mathbb A_{K,f}^\times/\widehat{\mathcal O}^\times_n\\]
via class field theory. As such, away from a finite set, a prime \\(\mathfrak p\\) of \\(K\\) splits completely in \\(H_n\\) if and only if a uniformizer of \\(K_{\mathfrak p}^\times\hookrightarrow\mathbb A_{K,f}^\times\\) lands in \\(K^\times\widehat{\mathcal O}^\times_n\\). This latter condition is conjugation-invariant (because \\(K^\times\\) and \\(\widehat{\mathcal O}^\times_n\\) are both preserved by conjugation), so Theorem 2 implies that the extension \\(H_n/\mathbb Q\\) is Galois.

> **Remark 8.**
Of course, Theorem 2 is not the only way to prove the claim of Example 7, but it is a quick way. Note that the "usual" argument which shows that the Hilbert class field is Galois does not really apply: one usually shows that the Hilbert class field is Galois by using the fact that it is the maximal unramified abelian extension, which is a property preserved by composites and embeddings. It seems trickier to give an analogous description of the ring class fields in Example 7.